src/ifc5d/README.md, before:

# ifc5d

## Description

Ifc5D is a collection of utilities of manipulating cost-related data to and from
formats, reports, and optimisation engines.

Currently supported:

 - CSV to IFC
 - IFC to XLSX
 - IFC to CSV
 - IFC to ODS


Planned (would you like to contribute? Please reach out!):


 - IFC to PDF
 - ODS to CSV
 - XLSX to CSV
 - IFC to Graph

## Usage CSV to IFC

See example files as a CSV file format reference:
- `sample_cost_schedule_house_FR.csv` / `.ods`
- `schedule.csv`, `rates.csv` (schedule of rates example)

Some notes on the format:
- Empty lines are ignored.
- Importing ods/xlsx is not currently supported, only csv.
- 'Hierarchy' is just an informational column that doesn't affect the import.  
E.g. '1', '1.1', '1.1.1', etc.
- 'Index' column is a hierarchy depth that's used for building hierarchy during csv import, starting from 1.  
E.g. root items of the same level have index '1', their children have '2', etc.
- 'Index' was preferred for import hierarchy source over 'Hierarchy' as it's easier to edit from the table view.


Simple example:
```python
import ifc5d.csv2ifc

csv2ifc = ifc5d.csv2ifc.Csv2Ifc(csv_filepath, ifc_file)
csv2ifc.execute()
```


## Usage IFC to CSV, ODS, XSLS

Simple example:
```python
import ifc5d.ifc5Dspreadsheet

# csv.
writer = ifc5d.ifc5Dspreadsheet.Ifc5DCsvWriter(ifc_file, temp_csv_dir)
writer.write()
```

### CLI app for converting IFC files to CSV, ODS or XLSX format.

Usage:
    python ifc5Dspreadsheet.py input_file output_file [-l log_file] [-f format_type]

Arguments:
    input_file (str): The path to the input IFC file to process.
    output_file (str): The output directory for CSV or filename for other formats.

Options:
    -l, --log log_file (str): The path to the file where errors should be logged. Default is process.log.
    -f, --format format_type (str): The output format to export in (csv/ods/xlsx). Default is csv.

Examples:
    python ifc5Dspreadsheet.py "C:\Users\Dev-Machine\Desktop\test_cost.ifc" rev_01_schedule -l error.log -f ODS
    python ifc5Dspreadsheet.py "C:\Users\Username\Desktop\test_cost.ifc" "C:\Users\Username\Desktop" -l error.log -f CSV

### Scripting:

Example for ODS exports:

```
import ifcopenshell
from ifc5d.ifc5Dspreadsheet import Ifc5DOdsWriter

file = "path_to_file/file.ifc"

path = "directory/cost_schedule"
writer = Ifc5DOdsWriter(file=file, output=path)
writer.write()

```

Commit message:

ifc5d readme - add notes for possible missing columns

src/ifc5d/README.md, after:

# ifc5d

## Description

Ifc5D is a collection of utilities of manipulating cost-related data to and from
formats, reports, and optimisation engines.

Currently supported:

 - CSV to IFC
 - IFC to XLSX
 - IFC to CSV
 - IFC to ODS


Planned (would you like to contribute? Please reach out!):


 - IFC to PDF
 - ODS to CSV
 - XLSX to CSV
 - IFC to Graph

## Usage CSV to IFC

See example files as a CSV file format reference:
- `sample_cost_schedule_house_FR.csv` / `.ods`
- `schedule.csv`, `rates.csv` (schedule of rates example)

Some notes on the format:
- Empty lines are ignored.
- Importing ods/xlsx is not currently supported, only csv.
- 'Property', 'Query' columns are required only for non-schedule of rates cost schedules.
- Some older exports may have 'Description' field instead of 'Name', it is safe to just rename it.
- 'Hierarchy' is just an informational column that doesn't affect the import.  
E.g. '1', '1.1', '1.1.1', etc.
- 'Index' column is a hierarchy depth that's used for building hierarchy during csv import, starting from 1.  
E.g. root items of the same level have index '1', their children have '2', etc.
- 'Index' was preferred for import hierarchy source over 'Hierarchy' as it's easier to edit from the table view.


Simple example:
```python
import ifc5d.csv2ifc

csv2ifc = ifc5d.csv2ifc.Csv2Ifc(csv_filepath, ifc_file)
csv2ifc.execute()
```


## Usage IFC to CSV, ODS, XSLS

Simple example:
```python
import ifc5d.ifc5Dspreadsheet

# csv.
writer = ifc5d.ifc5Dspreadsheet.Ifc5DCsvWriter(ifc_file, temp_csv_dir)
writer.write()
```

### CLI app for converting IFC files to CSV, ODS or XLSX format.

Usage:
    python ifc5Dspreadsheet.py input_file output_file [-l log_file] [-f format_type]

Arguments:
    input_file (str): The path to the input IFC file to process.
    output_file (str): The output directory for CSV or filename for other formats.

Options:
    -l, --log log_file (str): The path to the file where errors should be logged. Default is process.log.
    -f, --format format_type (str): The output format to export in (csv/ods/xlsx). Default is csv.

Examples:
    python ifc5Dspreadsheet.py "C:\Users\Dev-Machine\Desktop\test_cost.ifc" rev_01_schedule -l error.log -f ODS
    python ifc5Dspreadsheet.py "C:\Users\Username\Desktop\test_cost.ifc" "C:\Users\Username\Desktop" -l error.log -f CSV

### Scripting:

Example for ODS exports:

```
import ifcopenshell
from ifc5d.ifc5Dspreadsheet import Ifc5DOdsWriter

file = "path_to_file/file.ifc"

path = "directory/cost_schedule"
writer = Ifc5DOdsWriter(file=file, output=path)
writer.write()

```
